Input File Format for OceanWave3D Simulations of NewWave GroupsThis document explains the input file format for simulating the propagation of a NewWave group across a rectangular domain using OceanWave3D (OW3D). Segments of code for the input file are shown in blue followed by an explanation for the parameters. The NewWave group is imposed by specifying the corresponding surface elevation and surface potential, in two-dimensional (x,y) space, as an initial condition for the simulation. Typically, the initial condition imposes a defocused NewWave group and the simulation is performed up until focus and allowed to continue running until the group again defocuses. Initial conditions are read from an external file as specified in the input file. The size and discretization of the domain is specified as well as the order of the finite discretization schemes. The time stepping parameters can also be specified as well as the solver for the nonlinear matrix as well as the preconditioning matrix and the filtering techniques to be applied. Planes can then be specified for the extraction of data during the simulation at specified locations and time-steps. The OW3D code is a fortran code with an input file parser that is highly sensitive. Thus, some parts of the input file will not actually be used by the code for the NewWave simulations. None the less, no parts of the input file should ever be deleted since the format of the input file must exactly match the expected format. Note: boundary conditions are not explicitly defined for the NewWave simulations because the selected operating mode for OceanWave3D simulates a ‘closed domain’, i.e., a tank, consisting of slip boundaries on all sidewalls and the bottom surface. A Neumann boundary condition is applied which sets the potential function derivative in the direction normal to the ‘wall’ to zero – this ensures that no velocity exists normal to the ‘walls’ but also implies that each wall is mathematically equivalent to a symmetry plane. Thus, a symmetry plane is automatically implemented wherever a ‘wall’ is placed which can be used to reduce the domain size for symmetric problems]Section 1: Initial condition (and the wave generation technique, if applicable)-1 2 0.5	<- Initial condition (0=defined by funPressureTerm.f90, 1=NL standing wave, 2=shoaling on a smooth beach, 3=Whalin bar, see Initialization.f90:SetupInitialConditions); IncWaveType (0=none, 1=stream function, 2=linear regular or irregular waves)To instruct OW3D to read the initial conditions from an input file, the first argument should be the integer ´-1´(although this is not included in the list of possible entries). If the first argument is ‘-1’ then the second argument does not matter since no ´WaveType’ needs to be specified for wave generation. If waves must be generated, this can be done with either a stream function method (second argument ‘1’) or as a regular/irregular wave (second argument ‘2’) as indicated. The third argument specifies the relative acceleration (a/g) threshold before the ‘breaking model’ is implemented – the breaking model applies local smoothing to dissipate energy in the vicinity of regions which exceed the acceleration threshold. The breaking model is disabled if no value is specified for the third argument. Instances of breaking which occur during the solution are recorded in an output log file titled, ‘local.smoothing’.Section 2: Domain size, grid distribution and incorporation of ghost nodes10240. 5120. 1000. 1025 129 9 0 0 1 1 1 1	<- Lx Ly Lz Nx Ny Nz GridX GridY GridZ(0=even,1=clustering) GhostGrid (0=off,1=on)The first three arguments specify the size of the domain (in x,y,z) as real-valued numbers. For these real-valued entries, exponential notation can also be used. All remaining arguments are integers. Arguments four, five and six specify the number of grid points in each of these dimensions. Arguments seven, eight and nine specify whether the points in the x, y, z direction should be uniformly distributed or ´clustered´. Clustering results in coarser point distributions on one end of the domain transitioning smoothly to a finer point distribution on the other side of the domain following a cosine (cos) distribution – this is an inbuilt feature of the code and the distribution cannot be modified without altering the fortran source-code. For the NewWave simulations, clustering is not required in the x and y directions but should be used in the z direction, as shown in this file (… 0,0,1 …). Arguments ten, eleven and twelve specify whether ghost nodes should be used for the x-plane boundaries, y-plane boundaries and z-bottom boundary. It is recommended that ghost nodes ALWAYS be used for all surfaces except the ‘free’ water surface, as indicated by this example (… 1,1,1) since the ghost nodes are known to improve the stability and allow for a greater variety of boundary conditions.Section 3: Order of convergence for finite difference schemes (nonlinear & preconditioning matrices)3 3 3 1 1 1	<- alpha, beta, gammaThe first three arguments specify the order (of convergence) for the finite difference scheme used to construct the nonlinear matrix solved by GMRES while the last three arguments specify the order (of convergence) for the finite differencing used for the preconditioning matrix. Central differencing is used for both matrices so, for example, if the first argument is ‘3’ (as shown here) this applies to the discretization in the x-direction for the nonlinear matrix and means that three points will be used to either side of each point (in the x-direction) – this means that seven points will be used and the discretization in the x-direction is of the 6th order. Similarly, a second argument of ‘3’ means that discretization in the y-direction will also be of the 6th order and third argument of ‘3’ imposes 6th order discretization in the z-direction. This example file (3,3,3) thus prescribes 6th order discretization in all three-dimensions as recommended for the NewWave simulation. [Note, the ultimate ‘Order of Convergence’ for any scheme is typically given by the LOWEST discretization used so arguments of (3,3,1) for the nonlinear matrix would imply 6th order discretization in the x and y directions but 2nd order discretization in the z direction and should be described as a 2nd order method]. The last three arguments also specify the order of discretization in the x,y and z direction for the preconditioning matrix. Preconditioning is used to expedite the solution procedure and a multigrid method has been implemented with 2nd order preconditioning. Thus, the last three arguments should be (1,1,1) to indicate that three points are used in the x, y and z directions resulting in 2nd order precision for the preconditioning. [Note: near the boundaries, central differencing cannot be used because only one layer of ghost nodes exists. Thus, near the boundaries, a different form of finite differencing is used but this is implemented in the fortran source code and cannot be altered here].Section 4: Time stepping scheme (duration, step, CFL, etc.)1401 0.375 1 0. 1	<- Nsteps, dt, timeintegration scheme (1=RK4,2=lowstorage-RK45), CFL (if CFL/=0 then dt=CFL*dxmin/c, assume c=sqrt(g*hdeep)), RK4-ExtrapolationON/OFFThe first argument specifies the number of time steps while the second argument specifies the time interval for each step in seconds. The third argument specifies the time marching scheme which is recommended to be Runge-Kutta 4th Order (RK4) corresponding to an integer value of ‘1’ as shown. The fourth argument provides the option to specify the CFL which can ‘clobber’ or overwrite the hard-coded time step. However, it is not recommended to prescribe the CFL for complex problems (set the value of the fourth argument to zero) since the CFL requires a characteristic velocity which the code estimates based on the phase speed of a deep water wave. However, this estimate is not necessarily valid for these complicated NewWave simulations and a hard-coded time step is preferred. None the less, the CFL of the simulation should be calculated in post-processing and reported in any publications – once an appropriate characteristic velocity has been identified. The last argument specifies whether RK extrapolation should be used [Extrapolation techniques can be used to calculate additional values that are also used as part of the numerical scheme to artificially increase the order of convergence which can accelerate the solution procedure. However, most extrapolation techniques rely on monotonic trends in the variable. Thus, the time step must still be limited to ensure stability. Richardson extrapolation is a common formulation used for this purpose]. [Note: the CFL can be approximated using the phase velocity as the characteristic velocity based on peak wavenumber & depth]Section 5: Physical constant (gravitational acceleration)9.82	<- gravitational acceleration constantSection 6: Solver & Preconditioning Parameters1 3 0 25 1e-6 1e-6 1 V 1 1 20	<- solver (0:DC, 1:GMRES), GMRES Preconditioning (0=none (Matrix free,DIRECT),1=Linear LU(no elimination),2=Linear LU(ghostpoints eliminated),3=Multigrid (no elimination) ), Coarsening Strategy (0=Allan's, 1=Ole's), GMRESmaxiterations, relative tolerance (reltol), abstol, maxit, cyclet, pre-smoothings, post-smoothings, MGmaxgrids, DOF breakevenThe solver for the nonlinear matrix is specified by the first argument with the recommendation to use GMRES, denoted by ‘1’, since GMRES is extraordinarily robust. However, GMRES is memory intensive because ALL the data from ALL iterations must be kept to force convergence through to the specified residual tolerances (specified in relative and absolute terms in arguments 5 and 6) at each time step. The GMRES method is able to achieve iteration convergence in a remarkably small number of iterations (~10). However, for large grids the RAM memory requirements can still be prohibitive. Thus, the number of iterations must be minimized at each time step which can be achieved with preconditioning of the nonlinear matrix. For 2D problems, preconditioning can be performed with the Direct LU method which scales linearly with domain size. However, for 3D problems, preconditioning must be performed with the multi-grid technique as indicated by the second argument which denotes ‘3’ for the multi-grid preconditioning scheme. A multi-grid scheme iterates alternatively on fine and coarse versions of the grid at every time step to accelerate iterative convergence using the coarsening strategy specified in argument three. With multi-grid preconditioning, iterative convergence at each time step should be achieved with less than 25 iterations at maximum (the maximum allowable number of GMRES iterations is specified in the fourth argument). The number of multi-grid levels is ultimately restricted by the order of the preconditioning scheme – a 2nd order preconditioning scheme has been implemented for the multi-grid technique in OW3D. Thus, the coarsest possible grid is 3 x 3 x 3 which defines the lower bound of the multi-grid levels with the upper bound being the finest grid level specified in section 2 of the settings file. The number of intermediate levels will be defined by the coarsening strategy which is selected in argument three although this can be limited by argument eleven (the final argument) which prescribes the maximum number of levels and clobbers the coarsening strategy if the strategy produces more levels than allowed by argument eleven. To utilise the maximum number of multi-grid levels, the number of grid points in the x, y and z direction, specified by arguments four, five and six in section 2, should follow the form (2^n+1) which ensures the number of grids will be a power of 2 and the coarsest possible grid will be 3 x 3 x 3 points. [Note: despite the multi-grid preconditioning, the memory requirements of the GMRES scheme have proven prohibitive for the GPU version of OW3D which prompted a switch to the Defect Correction Method (DCM), which exhibited frequent instability, followed by another switch to the Quasi Minimum Residual (QMR) technique which seems to be working well. The ‘DOF breakeven’ in the description is no longer part of the code and does not appear in the arguments.Section 7: Stream Function Wave Generator (only applies if selected in section 1)0.05 1.00 1.84 2 0 0 1 6 32	<- Stream function solution parameters: H, h, L, T, WAVELorPER, uEorS, EorS, nsteps, maxiterNot relevant to the planned NewWave simulations since the NewWave group is imposed as an initial condition which is allowed to propagate through the domain so that no wave generation is required. Thus, the first argument of section 1 is set to ‘-1’ specifying an input file for the initial condition. Wave generation with a stream-function would require the first argument of section 1 to be the integer ‘0’ followed by the second argument of ‘1’ to specify a stream-function wave.Section 8: Data storage parameters (surface elevation and kinematics)-32 20 1 1	<- StoreDataOnOff, formattype, (StoreDataOnOff=0 -> no output, StoreDataOnOff=+stride-> binary, StoreDataOnOff=-stride -> ascii every stride time steps.  formattype=0, binary; =1, unformatted) If formattype=20, then the line should read: StoreDataOnOff, iKinematics, formattype, nOutFiles; and nOutFiles lines should appear below defining  [xbeg, xend, xstride, ybeg, yend, ystride, tbeg, tend, tstride] for each file.The first argument determines whether the surface elevation & potential for the entire domain is saved, as well as interval and the format of the data files – the value of the integer defines the interval between the saving of surface elevation & potential data files while the sign (+/-) specifies the format. In this example, the first argument has been specified as ´-32´ ensuring that the surface elevation & potential for the entire domain is saved every 32 time steps in the ‘ascii’ format. The third argument further specifies the format of the surface elevation/potential files and an integer value of ‘1’ should be specified to ensure the ‘unformatted’ form which is also necessary for Matlab post-processing. Thus, for the NewWave simulations, the first argument should ALWAYS be a negative integer and the third argument should ALWAYS be ‘1’ to ensure the correct format of the surface elevation/potential files for Matlab post-processing. The second argument determines whether kinematics are also saved – an integer value of ‘20’ indicates that kinematics must be saved while the fourth argument specifies the number of measurement planes that are required. The number of measurement planes is currently limited to 9 or 10 (not sure) based on hard-coded parameters in the OW3D fortran source code – thus, increasing the number of measurement planes beyond 9 or 10 requires modification of the source code. For every measurement plane required, the location and time of data capture must be specified in a follow-on line as shown below:1 1025 1 64 65 1 1 1401 1A new line is required for every measurement plane specifying the location of the plane in terms of the start and end location in both the x and y direction – it is assumed that the plane traverses the full depth (z-direction) of the domain as well as the ‘stride’ or the interval between points for data capture. The time steps of data capture must also be specified. Note: the data capture for the kinematics is entirely independent from the data capture for surface elevation/potential so these parameters can be saved at different locations and time intervals.Section 9: Nonlinearity and Surface Forcing1 0	<- 0/1=linear/nonlinear computations, Dynamic pressure term on/offThe first argument determines whether nonlinearity is included in the OW3D numerical solution. The dynamic pressure term described by the second argument should be off (‘0’) because this term is only used if the surface is ‘forced’ by some kind of imposed pressure distribution, e.g., an overpassing ship. For the NewWave simulations, we are focused on ‘free’ waves propagating across a surface exposed uniformly to ambient pressure – thus, the dynamic pressure term is not required.Section 10: Filtering (Domain & Boundaries)0 6 10 0.08 0.08 0.4	<- SG-filtering on/off, filter half width, poly orderSavitzky-Golay (SG) filtering is applied to the surface elevation as well as the surface potential to prevent instabilities which arise in strongly nonlinear and periodic problems due to aliasing errors which accumulate at high frequencies. The SG filters should be used for the NewWave simulations since some of the cases may exhibit significant nonlinearity for steep waves approaching the breaking limit or in the finite depth cases when nonlinearity due to shallowness occurs. NOTE: the first argument specifies how often the filtering is applied – an integer value of ‘1’ indicates that filtering should be applied after every time step. The number of points included in the filter, or the ‘Order’ of the filter, should be specified by the second argument, which is set at ‘6’ by default which means that 13 points will be used for the filter (6 points to either side of the node of interest). Note: reducing the number of points reduces the order of the filter and thus strengthens the ‘smearing’ or filtering effect while increasing the number of points increases the order of the filter thus reducing the ‘smearing’ effect of the filter. The third argument specifies the order of the polynomial used by the SG filter which is part of the SG method and a value of ‘10’ is used by default. The remaining arguments (four, five & six) apply to filtering at the boundaries which is done with an entirely different method because SG filters require central differencing and can actually behave as amplifiers when used with asymmetric stencils as required near the boundaries. From experience, the boundary filters are only important for the case of moving boundaries are other forms of boundary conditions which are prone to instability. Thus, it is highly unlikely that these values will ever need to be tuned for NewWave simulations and, thus, can be left with the default values specified above.Section 11: Wave Generation & Absorption (not required for NewWave simulations)0 8. 3 X 0.0	<- relaxation zones on/off, transient time, no. zones. For each zone define on following lines: x1 x2 y1 y2 ftype(=relaxation function) param XorY WavegenONOFF Degrees(=IC rotation)Relaxation zones are used to generate and absorb waves. For the NewWave simulations, relaxation zones are not required because the waves are imposed by initial conditions and continue to propagate across the domain, without meeting a boundary, until the solution is finished. The first argument should, thus, be set to ‘0’ to turn off the ‘relaxation zone’ feature. If wave generation or absorption is required, the number of zones should be specified in the third argument and additional lines should be added to specify the location and type of relaxation zone (similar to section 8). The inputs for this form of wave generation can come from the stream function parameters specified in section 7 or the sea-state conditions specified in section 13. The second argument of section 1 should be set to ‘1’ to activate the stream function feature or should be set to ‘2’ to use an underlying sea-state – example input files are included with OW3D which show how such zones can be implemented, including the introduction of oblique waves as presented in the OW3D paper. To implement the relaxation zones, the length of the zone should be approximately two characteristic wave-lengths and the ‘line’ zone for relaxation is place in the center (one wave length from the boundary and one wavelength from the domain to be simulated). Note: the relaxation zone cannot be placed directly on the domain boundary since this capability has not been integrated into the OW3D fortran source-code.0 0	<- Damping pressure zone:  PDampingOnOff=0 (off), number of zones.  For each zone include the line: x1, x2, y1, y2 (bounds of the zone), gamma0 (dynamic FSBC), Gamma0 (kinematic FSBC), i_damperType (0=friction on the velocity, 1=friction on the potential).Wave generation and absorption can also be performed with ‘damping pressure zones’ which are particularly more effective at absorbing waves than relaxation zones – superior attenuation can be achieved with less space in the domain. However, damping zones have only been implemented in OW3D for 2D waves and, thus, this feature is not relevant to the simulation of directionally-spread NewWave groups.Section 12: Fluid-Structure Interaction Patterns0 2.0 2 0 0 1 0	<- SWENSE on/off, ramp in time, wf direction (1:+x ; -1:-x ; 2:+y ; -2:-y ; >3: angle of the 3D wavefield), Reflexion of incident wf: West, East, North, South (0=off,1=on)SWENSE was introduced to OW3D by a previous student but this feature of OW3D has not been used for years and is not recommended for use. This technique relies on complete knowledge of the incident wave at all points in the domain and seeks only to calculate the resultant reflection pattern around some obstacle which constructively/destructively interacts with the incident wave – SWENSE calculates the resultant interaction pattern. Obviously, this feature is not necessary for the NewWave simulations since we are not trying to simulate wave-structure interaction presently.0	<- Curvilinear on/offThe introduction of obstacles into the OW3D domain requires a curvilinear domain and some common problems are already in-built into OW3D, such as waves interacting with a bottom mounted cylinder. Such cases will require a few characteristic parameters, such as the cylinder diameter, to be included as inputs and the ‘curvilinear’ grid feature will need to be activated.Section 13: Sea-State Underlying Spectrum (Monochromatic, Irregular and ‘Random’)33  8. 2. 80. 20. -1 -11 100. 50. run06.el 22.5 1.0 3.3	<- Irregular/regular waves:  i_spec, T_p, H_s, h0, kh_max, seed, seed2, x0, y0, (inc_wave_file or gamma_JONSWAP, if ispec=2 or 3), (inc_wave_file,beta,S,gamma_JONSWAP if ispec>=30).  For a random wave, the spectrum (i_spec=):  -1=>Monochromatic, 0=>P-M, 1=>JONSWAP, 2=>Read from a file, 3=>JONSWAP with input gamma; +- 3* means 3D at angle beta -30=>Monochromatic, 30=>P-M, 31=>JONSWAP, 32=>Not yet implemented 33=>JONSWAP with Normal spreading, 34=> JONSWAP with cos^S spreading.Wave generation can be accomplished with a combination of a relaxation zone and the stream function parameters listed in section 7, or alternatively a variety of options exist for the generation of irregular/regular waves. Waves can be generated from an underlying spectrum (JONSWAP, PM, etc.) and the necessary parameters should be specified in the arguments above. This type of simulation is the current focus of the GPU version of OW3D for the DeRisk project, but is unlikely to form part of our NewWave study.Comments:The size of the simulation domain may be altered. The recommended starting time of -20Tp ensures that error waves are negligible since the group is initially highly defocused and a 2nd order correction has been applied to the initial conditions. However, OceanWave3D does not allow for a moving grid so a starting time of -20Tp requires a large domain for propagation of the group up to the focusing event. The starting time may be changed to -10Tp to reduce the domain size. However, the initial conditions will likely require 3rd order correction since the group will be much steeper at the onset of the solution.